{:title "Why am I writing LPER?"
 :layout :post
 :draft? true
 :tags ["technical" "clojure" "lper"]}

I recently started a project called [LPER](https://github.com/ajoberstar/lper). This is intended to be a REPL-based IDE
for Clojure. Since I find my motivations complicated, I felt like I should explain them longform.

## My Clojure background

My experience is mostly in CI/CD/DevOps, primarily developing in the Java language. [My open-source work](https://github.com/ajoberstar) has mostly been in Gradle plugins, since before Gradle 1.0 (almost 10 years ago now). As discussed in [previous posts](2012-03-18-7-languages-clojure.md), I first used Clojure after reading the [7 Languages in 7 Weeks book](https://pragprog.com/titles/btlang/seven-languages-in-seven-weeks/) which exposes you to languages in different paradigms, and I've been fascinated by it since.

No other programming languages has changed how I think about programming more than Clojure. My Java code style has been fundamentally changed and I just write better, simpler code because of it in any language.

However, when working in Clojure, I find myself in a constant tension that feels ingrained in Clojure as a language and community. "Embrace the host" is in practice more parasitic (i.e. one way).

  - While Clojure and ClojureScript's key features (e.g. immutable data structures) have had good mindshare and influence on the JVM and JS landscape, there aren't many Clojure libraries or tools that are embraced outside of Clojure's community. This isn't true of the other key JVM languages: Groovy - Gradle and Spock; Scala - Linkerd, Spark, and Akka; Kotlin - IntelliJ and Android usage.
  - Using Clojure code from Java is ugly, which promotes the mostly one-way usage.
  - Clojure core seems to be uninterested in smoothing compatibility with newer Java features, e.g. lambdas, nio.file, java.time, or even old ones like variadic methods.

While I've done a decent amount of hobbyist Clojure coding, I haven't found an equilibrium and every time I touch it I jump down a rabbit hole of tooling and ecosystem struggles.

## My problem with Clojure editors/tooling

Code is data and data is code, unless you're writing code, in which case it's still text. While I think Lisp syntax is superior, as a text format it just doesn't play well with typical editors that are more optimized for Algol-like syntax.

For all the benefits Parinfer and Paredit provide, the fact that you're still editing a text file in an editor made for text files is a leaky abstraction.

Of the existing editors:

- Outside of Clojure I primarily work in VS Code, but I've found the Clojure experience lacking:
  - Calva is impressive, however I like using VS Code because of muscle memory and familiarity. Calva's defaults stomp on a lot of my normal VS Code workflow.
  - Clover provides a simpler experience, but only works with Socket REPLs.
  - Parinfer support is lacking, which I've read is due to limitations of VS Code's core APIs.
- Atom has Chlorine and good Parinfer but, as an overall editor, languishes in the shadow of VS Code these days.
- Cursive is the most impressive Clojure environment I've used, with great Parinfer support, but the overall experience of Intellij is too unfamiliar to me for me to want to stay there.
- Emacs has Lisp mindshare, but
- The REPL is a key feature, yet convention is write code in a text file and send it to the REPL, not the other way around.

It's not lost on me that the core of these opinions is that the Clojure experience in each feels too different to me, and I don't want to spend the time learning it. Seems like a blatant contradiction to then say, well I'll just write my own instead.

I'd distill it to:

- Clojure is too different from my existing programming experience to feel right in a normal editor.
- Existing editors have a large learning curve, but don't seem to leave traditional programming enough in the dust to make me reach the potential I think Clojure has.
- I just don't know what I want yet and exploring it by making my own IDE is a way to work through that uncertainty.

## Goals for LPER

All LPER is right now (0.1.0) is a JavaFX prepl client. That's pretty far removed from an IDE. But ultimately I want a couple key things:

- Data-based editing (not structural editing). The equivalent of Paredit, but purely working on data, where the text on the screen is just a view to this. Maybe it doesn't even get saved to a traditional source file.

  I want it to feel more like Parinfer, (i.e. not as many keyboard shortcuts) but expect it will be more like Paredit.

- You edit entirely in the REPL, and you save it out as a way to run it later. Source of truth is data in the REPL, not a textual source file.
- Supporting socket REPL, prepl, and nREPL so you aren't bound to any of them.
- Support multiple REPL sessions simulatneously.
- Separate process from the JVM my project is running in. It may not always be an issue, but I don't want the classpath confusion of having the IDE and project together.

I don't expect any of this to be novel. I do expect that this is already done better in existing Lisp communities, I'm not familar with, or by existing Clojure tooling I haven't used enough. I do expect to learn a lot.

Perhaps this project will serve as nothing more than ingraining structural editing into my head and get me to embrace
Paredit, allowing me to switch to Calva or Emacs more easily.

Perhaps I'll shelve this project in a year, a month, or a week.

Time will tell.
